# DA-DAwPy_TrafficPoliceStopProject_01

# Examining the dataset

I analyzed a dataset of traffic stops in Rhode Island that was collected by the Stanford Open Policing Project.

Before beginning the analysis, I became familiar with the dataset;

I read the dataset into pandas, examined the first few rows, and then counted the number of missing values. I dropped the 'county_name' column because it only contains missing values, and I dropped the 'state column' because all of the traffic stops took place in one state (Rhode Island). Thus, I dropped those columns, because they contain no useful information.The 'is_arrested' column currently has the object data type. I changed the data type to bool, which is the most suitable type for a column containing True and False values. So, I use mathematical operations on the is_arrested column that would not be possible otherwise. I combined 'stop_date' and 'stop_time' into a single column, and then converted it to datetime format. So, this will enable convenient date-based attributes that I will use later. I set the 'stop_datetime; column as the DataFrame's index. By replacing the default index with a DatetimeIndex, I will make it easier to analyze the dataset by date and time.

Then, I made analysis to explore the relationship between gender and policing;

I examined the violations committed by all drivers to get a baseline understanding of the data, before comparing the violations being committed by each gender. I counted the unique values in the 'violation' column. In order to understand whether male and female drivers tend to commit different types of traffic violations, I created a DataFrame for each gender, and then analyzed the violations in each DataFrame separately. When a driver is pulled over for speeding, many people believe that gender has an impact on whether the driver will receive a ticket or a warning. I examined if there is an evidence for this idea or not. Firstly, I created two DataFrames of drivers who were stopped for speeding: one containing females and the other containing males. Then, for each gender, I used the 'stop_outcome' column to calculate what percentage of stops resulted in a "Citation" (meaning a ticket) versus a "Warning". During a traffic stop, the police officer sometimes conducts a search of the vehicle.  I calculated the percentage of all stops that result in a vehicle search, also known as the search rate. I compared the rates at which female and male drivers are searched during a traffic stop and found that the vehicle search rate across all stops is about 3.8%. I filtered the DataFrame by gender and calculated the search rate for each group separately. Then, I performed the same calculation for both genders at once using a .groupby() Even though the search rate for males is much higher than for females, it's possible that the difference is mostly due to a second factor. For example, you might hypothesize that the search rate varies by violation type, and the difference in search rate between males and females is because they tend to commit different violations. I tested this hypothesis by examining the search rate for each combination of gender and violation. If the hypothesis was true, I would find that males and females are searched at about the same rate for each violation. During a vehicle search, the police officer may pat down the driver to check if they have a weapon. This is known as a "protective frisk.". I firstly checked to see how many times "Protective Frisk" was the only search type. Then, I used a string method to locate all instances in which the driver was frisked. I compared the rates at which female and male drivers are frisked during a search. Are males frisked more often than females, perhaps because police officers consider them to be higher risk?

Thirdly, I made a visual explotary data analysis;

Are you more likely to get arrested at a certain time of day? Are drug-related stops on the rise? I answered these and other questions by analyzing the dataset visually, since plots can help us to understand trends in a way that examining the raw data cannot. When a police officer stops a driver, a small percentage of those stops ends in an arrest. This is known as the arrest rate. I found out whether the arrest rate varies by time of day or not. First, I calculated the arrest rate across all stops. Then, calculated the hourly arrest rate by using the hour attribute of the index. The hour ranges from 0 to 23, in which:
0 = midnight, 12 = noon, 23 = 11 PM. In a small portion of traffic stops, drugs are found in the vehicle during a search. I assessed whether these drug-related stops are becoming more common over time. The Boolean column 'drugs_related_stop' indicates whether drugs were found during a given stop. I calculated the annual drug rate by resampling this column, and then I used a line plot to visualize how the rate has changed over time. I found that the rate of drug-related stops increased significantly between 2005 and 2015. I might hypothesize that the rate of vehicle searches was also increasing, which would have led to an increase in drug-related stops even if more drivers were not carrying drugs. I could test this hypothesis by calculating the annual search rate, and then plotting it against the annual drug rate. If the hypothesis is true, then I'll see both rates increasing over time. The state of Rhode Island is broken into six police districts, also known as zones. How do the zones compare in terms of what violations are caught by police? I created a frequency table to determine how many violations of each type took place in each of the six zones. Then, I filtered the table to focus on the "K" zones. I've created a frequency table focused on the "K" zones, I visualized the data to compare what violations are being caught in each zone. First I created a bar plot, which is an appropriate plot type since I am comparing categorical data. Then I created a stacked bar plot in order to get a slightly different look at the data. In the traffic stops dataset, the 'stop_duration' column tells us approximately how long the driver was detained by the officer. Unfortunately, the durations are stored as strings, such as '0-15 Min'. In order to analyze this data easliy, I converted the stop durations to integers. Because the precise durations are not available, I estimated the numbers using reasonable values: Convert '0-15 Min' to 8, Convert '16-30 Min' to 23, Convert '30+ Min' to 45. If you were stopped for a particular violation, how long might you expect to be detained? I visualized the average length of time drivers are stopped for each type of violation. Rather than using the violation column in this exercise, I used violation_raw since it contains more detailed descriptions of the violations.

Lastly, I analysed the effect of weather on policing;


